+++
Description = "Top-level view on website analytics, tracking, and privacy."
date = "2017-02-19T17:47:31-05:00"
title = "Now Entering an Analytics-Free Zone"
Categories = ["privacy", "analytics"]
Tags = ["privacy", "analytics", "tracking", "google analytics", "piwik" ]

+++

Telling people you are starting a blog is one of those things that
typically garners a reaction. Mostly, it involves questions: what will you
discuss?  How often will you post? Are you going to quit before you start
(poignant!)?

Occasionally, however, you'll also get advice on what to discuss, how
often to post, and many other things. I'm always grateful to learn from
[people who have blogged more than me](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/everyone),
so naturally I was excited to hear about others' blogging experiences.
Some people even showed me their blogs.

At least two friends, whom I would consider non-technical, offered to
show me their Wordpress setup, complete with statistics about which
users from what countries had visited their site, what pages had been
the most popular, and so forth. I believe this functionality is
offered by WP out of the box as an analytics package.

I'm not sure if they knew, but they also had Google Analytics (GA) set
up on their sites. I wasn't sure if GA was powering Wordpress or was
an independent thing. In any event, data was being collected via the
ever-present web analytics on the sites.

## A brief primer on web analytics

[Web analytics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_analytics) essentially
involve tracking data generated by interacting with a web site. Much
of this data is associated with a user's behavior - how they got to
the site, how much time they spent on a page, whether or not the next
page they went to was on the same domain, how long pages are loading on average,
what city and country visitors are coming from, and other related measurements.
Wordpress, Google Analytics and others provide useful aggregations of
this data and expose this data to the owner of the particular blog or
web site.

Generally speaking, this data can be very useful for improving the
website. There's certainly utility in knowing, for example, the most
popular referrers (perhaps there's strategy to develop there when it
comes to ad placement or identifying an audience), the most popular
articles, the percentage of your audience who can afford to spend
money on what you're selling, and so forth.  I believe there are even
some social media components: for example, number of users coming from
the 'book and Twitter.

Of course, if all the numbers read 0, you've got some work to do. But
don't fret about that too much.

I can see how this data is both useful and fun to look at, for
non-technical people as well as those of us who work with and make
decisions based off data on a daily basis. There's a certain positive
reaction, according to my friend, when a new visitor from Bolivia
stumbles upon one of his articles about India (I didn't have the heart
to explain that it may just be a bunch of
[bots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_bot)).

I imagine the insights are even more relevant if your blog is at a
point where significant traffic is driving referrals, products, or ad
revenue - in other words, the money you get to take home. Pretty cool,
huh?

## It's just a numbers game

But the data must come from somewhere, and in this case, it's almost
certainly from users unaware of, or unable to stop, the
tracking. There's no information, opt-out process, or any other
indication that the users' mouse clicks, location, and next site
visited are being tracked.

Many users that are not tech savvy probably can't even
identify what web analytics are capable of, much less identify sites
(hint: *virtually all*) that use them. It's not possible to know if you're
on a Google Analytics site until it's too late - when GA has already
loaded and presumably sent data back - without your consent.  And, as
far as I can tell, Google Analytics
[does not respect do-not-track](http://www.outfox.com/do-not-track-for-google-analytics/),
which is already a somewhat technical feature.

More advanced users can
[protect themselves to some extent](https://disconnect.me/).
Or, if you truly trust Google, you can install some plugin that
*allegedly* tells Google Analytics not to send data back when visiting
sites with GA. I won't link to this as I don't want to appear to
encourage users to download this archive without seeing its contents,
and I'm certainly not volunteering to scope it.

### Piwik, the savior?

Before you think I'm putting Google on blast unfairly, I won't
spare [other analytics software](https://piwik.org/) either. While I
appreciate some of their sales points - owning the data, "user privacy
protection", F/OSS - at the end of the day, it is exposing collection
of user data that, generally, the users aren't aware of.  Lastly, it
involves standing up MySQL (in 2017?) and PHP (?!)  thus
requiring a running server, not to mention exposing a plethora of
potential security issues.  The average web site owner has absolutely
no chance of fulfilling the advertised user privacy protection when
faced with administering a PHP-MySQL stack on their own.
[Postgres is not even supported](https://github.com/piwik/piwik/issues/500),
and given that issue has been open for 8 years now, probably won't be.

## Back to user space

Needless to say, the user gets the raw end of this deal. At minimum,
they're blissfully unaware of the massive amounts of data they leave
behind when visiting web sites, how they are tracked leaving and
entering other sites, and so forth.

I will focus on these issues in more (and less, for those who don't
work in tech) detail in upcoming articles, but for now, it's
sufficient to say that it's completely unacceptable to do this to
users here. As someone interested primarily in **helping** users, as
well as maintaining and protecting privacy, this sort of hidden data
collection is not very attractive.

## A matter of principles

I won't be adding or using analytics to this blog, no
matter how useful they may be to developing it. To be
honest, it's a principled (and therefore simple) decision: as someone
whose intent is to help users as well as someone who values privacy and
has put in effort into not being tracked online, I can't possibly
consider using privacy-compromising technology here.

At first, I thought this might be somewhat of a Stallman-esq stance:
this blog would be the only site, or one of a few, that chose not to
embed analytics or social media ~~trackers~~ buttons. Many would claim:
what's the point? Join in on the massive vacuuming of your users' data
for your benefit (as well as the benefit of a large advertising company)!

To my delight, this had been done by a couple of other blogs I had
seen recently.  [Mike's blog](https://michael-myers.github.io/blog/),
from which I essentially
[taxed](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Tax&defid=56623)
the entire setup of my own blog, has chosen to omit both GA as well as
Facebook and Twitter buttons on his site. He also went to the trouble
of removing GA from the otherwise excellent
[purehugo](http://themes.gohugo.io/purehugo/) theme,
contributions which I gratefully used myself. He justifies not using
analytics with a privacy argument.
[Another blog](http://jacquesmattheij.com/the-fastest-blog-in-the-world)
takes a different but also principled approach, reducing cruft and
inefficiency and discussion about how it these things reflect the
state of our society in general.

I personally appreciate both positions, but the privacy one rings
closer to home.

## Core purposes as guidance

One theme I want to be a part of this blog is the idea of helping
others navigate a world in which data they emit is frequently
collected, sold, bought, stolen, and battled over in courts, both
normal and secret (among other things).

While I have some goals for the blog, I can't share the specifics due to
[psychological reasons](http://berkeleysciencereview.com/when-telling-others-about-your-goals-compromises-them/).
None of the goals, however, involve monetizing users. As a result, web
analytics won't be a part of the experience around here.

With that said, enjoy a non-intrusive (and hopefully speedy)
experience on this blog, now and in to the future.
